In the modern world, we regularly encounter the words million and billion, and businesses, governments,
astronomers and 2 2 2
journalists often think in the millions, billions or even trillions. However, the word million has been around in
English only since the late fourteenth century. 4 The word billion was not introduced in the French language until the
fifteenth century and didn’t find its way into English until the end of the seventeenth century, which is fairly late in
 the history of counting. 4 What words were used before this time to talk about large numbers? This article looks at how
 we started using million and billion and how the meaning of billion has changed.
Before the Words Million and Billion
In fact, the largest number with a single-word name in ancient Greek was 10,000 . It was called murios and borrowed into
Late Latin as myrias. From myrias we get the English word myriad meaning “an extremely large number or amount”. The
ancients also had the “myriad myriad” ( 10,000 × 10,000 ) or one hundred million. Larger numbers were described in more
roundabout ways or by using mathematical notation; indeed, one million is expressed in Latin as decies centena milia or
10 × 100 × 1,000 , and Archimedes (3rd century BCE) had to establish his own system of mathematical notation in order to
systematically express numbers larger than the “myriad”. He explains this system in The Sand Reckoner, a treatise that
sets out to quantify all the grains of sand 4 in the universe in order to challenge the idea that such a quantity was too
large to be counted.
What Exactly Is a Billion?
For those who were taught numbers before the 1970s, the answer to this question may well have been different depending
on where you received your schooling. While it is accepted in English today that one billion equals 109 , it is important
 to be aware, especially when reading older texts, that in the United Kingdom billion hasn’t always meant 109 . Until the
 1970s, when the United Kingdom officially adopted the American definition of billion, this word represented 1012 in
 British English. 0,56 1
This difference resulted from the emergence of two competing systems for naming large numbers. A fifteenth-century
mathematician, Nicolas Chuquet, established one system by combining Latin numerical prefixes (bi-, tri-, etc.) with the
suffix -illion to form powers of one million. In this system, a billion equals one million times one million (or one
million squared, 1012 ) and a trillion equals one million cubed ( 1018 ). This is known as the long scale, which was used
in the United Kingdom until they followed the United States in 1974 by officially adopting the short scale, a system
born in France in the seventeenth century and popular in the French-speaking world until midway through the nineteenth
century. The short scale uses the same names 4 (billion, trillion, quadrillion, etc.) but assigns different values to
them, with one billion equalling a thousand million, one trillion equalling a thousand billion, and so forth, the logic
being that the prefix attached to -illion represents n in the formula 103(n+1). For example, quadrillion, with the
prefix quadri- meaning “four” is equal to 103 ( 4 + 1 ) or more simply 1015 . The short scale is used today throughout the
English-speaking world, whereas the French language has settled on the long scale, so that an English billion is
translated in French as un milliard and a French billion (also called mille milliards or “one thousand milliards” in
English) is translated in English as a trillion. The differences between the long scale and the short scale are
summarized in this table: