This chapter takes sustainable development as the starting point and focus for analysis. It considers the broad and
multifaceted bi-directional interplay between sustainable development, including its focus on eradicating poverty and
reducing inequality in their multidimensional aspects, and climate actions in a 1.5°C warmer world. These fundamental
connections are embedded in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The chapter also examines synergies and trade-offs
 of adaptation and mitigation options with sustainable development and the SDGs and offers insights into possible
 pathways, especially climate-resilient development pathways towards a 1.5°C warmer world.
Sustainable Development, Poverty and Inequality in a 1.5°C Warmer World
Limiting global warming to 1.5°C rather than 2°C above pre- industrial levels would make it markedly easier to achieve
many aspects of sustainable development, with greater potential to eradicate poverty and reduce inequalities (medium
evidence, high agreement). Impacts avoided with the lower temperature limit could reduce the number of people exposed to
 climate risks and vulnerable to poverty by 62 to 457 million, and lessen the risks of poor people to experience food
 and water insecurity, adverse health impacts, and economic losses, particularly in regions that already face
 development challenges (medium evidence, medium agreement). {5.2.2, 5.2.3} Avoided impacts expected to occur between
 1.5°C and 2°C warming would also make it easier to achieve certain SDGs, such as those that relate to poverty, hunger,
 health, water and sanitation, cities and ecosystems (SDGs 1, 2, 3, 6, 11, 14 and 15) (medium evidence, high agreement).
  {5.2.3, Table 5.2 available at the end of the chapter}
Compared to current conditions, 1.5°C of global warming would nonetheless pose heightened risks to eradicating poverty,
 reducing inequalities and ensuring human and ecosystem well- being (medium evidence, high agreement). Warming of 1.5°C
 is not considered ‘safe’ for most nations, communities, ecosystems and sectors and poses significant risks to natural
 and human systems as compared to the current warming of 1°C (high confidence). {Cross- Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 5} The
  impacts of 1.5°C of warming would disproportionately affect disadvantaged and vulnerable populations through food
  insecurity, higher food prices, income losses, lost livelihood opportunities, adverse health impacts and population
  displacements (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.2.1} Some of the worst impacts on sustainable development are
  expected to be felt among agricultural and coastal dependent livelihoods, indigenous people, children and the elderly,
   poor labourers, poor urban dwellers in African cities, and people and ecosystems in the Arctic and Small Island
   Developing States (SIDS) (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.2.1, Box 5.3, Chapter 3, Box 3.5, Cross-Chapter Box 9
   in Chapter 4}
Climate Adaptation and Sustainable Development
Prioritization of sustainable development and meeting the SDGs is consistent with efforts to adapt to climate change
(high confidence). Many strategies for sustainable development enable transformational adaptation for a 1.5°C warmer
world, provided attention is paid to reducing poverty in all its forms and to promoting equity and participation in
decision-making (medium evidence, high agreement). As such, sustainable development has the potential to significantly
reduce systemic vulnerability, enhance adaptive capacity, and promote livelihood security for poor and disadvantaged
populations (high confidence). {5.3.1}
Synergies between adaptation strategies and the SDGs are expected to hold true in a 1.5°C warmer world, across sectors
  and contexts (medium evidence, medium agreement). Synergies between adaptation and sustainable development are
  significant for agriculture and health, advancing SDGs 1 (extreme poverty), 2 (hunger), 3 (healthy lives and
  well-being) and 6 (clean water) (robust evidence, medium agreement). {5.3.2} Ecosystem- and community- based
  adaptation, along with the incorporation of indigenous and local knowledge, advances synergies with SDGs 5 (gender
  equality), 10 (reducing inequalities) and 16 (inclusive societies), as exemplified in drylands and the Arctic (high
  evidence, medium agreement). {5.3.2, Box 5.1, Cross-Chapter Box 10 in Chapter 4}
Adaptation  strategies  can  result in   trade-offs   with   and among the SDGs (medium evidence, high agreement).
Strategies that advance one SDG may create negative consequences for other SDGs, for instance SDGs 3 (health) versus 7
(energy consumption) and agricultural adaptation and SDG 2 (food security) versus SDGs 3 (health), 5 (gender equality),
6 (clean water), 10 (reducing inequalities), 14 (life below water) and 15 (life on the land) (medium evidence, medium
agreement). {5.3.2}
Pursuing  place-specific  adaptation  pathways   towards   a   1.5°C warmer world has the potential for significant
positive outcomes for well-being in countries at all levels of development (medium evidence, high agreement). Positive
outcomes emerge when adaptation pathways (i) ensure a diversity of adaptation options based on people’s values and the
trade-offs they consider acceptable, (ii) maximize synergies with sustainable development through inclusive,
participatory and deliberative processes, and (iii) facilitate equitable transformation. Yet such pathways would be
difficult to achieve without redistributive measures to overcome path dependencies, uneven power structures, and
entrenched social inequalities (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.3.3}
Mitigation and Sustainable Development
The deployment of mitigation options consistent with 1.5°C pathways leads to multiple synergies across a range of
sustainable development dimensions. At  the  same  time,  the rapid pace and magnitude of change that would be required
to limit warming to 1.5°C, if not carefully managed, would lead to trade-offs with some sustainable development
dimensions (high confidence). The number of synergies between mitigation response options and sustainable development
exceeds the number of trade- offs in energy demand and supply sectors; agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU);
 and for oceans (very high confidence). {Figure 5.2, Table 5.2 available at the end of the chapter} The 1.5°C pathways
 indicate robust synergies, particularly for the SDGs 3 (health), 7 (energy), 12 (responsible consumption and
 production) and 14 (oceans) (very high confidence). {5.4.2, Figure 5.3} For SDGs 1 (poverty), 2 (hunger), 6 (water) and
  7 (energy), there is a risk of trade-offs or negative side effects from stringent mitigation actions compatible with
  1.5°C of warming (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.4.2}
Appropriately designed mitigation actions to reduce energy demand can advance multiple SDGs simultaneously. Pathways
compatible with 1.5°C that feature low energy demand show the most pronounced synergies and the lowest number of
trade-offs with respect to sustainable development and the SDGs (very high confidence). Accelerating energy efficiency
in all sectors has synergies with SDGs 7 (energy), 9 (industry, innovation and infrastructure), 11 (sustainable cities
and communities), 12 (responsible consumption and production), 16 (peace, justice and strong institutions), and 17
(partnerships for the goals) (robust evidence, high agreement). {5.4.1, Figure 5.2, Table 5.2} Low-demand pathways,
which would reduce or completely avoid the reliance on bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) in 1.5°C
pathways, would result in significantly reduced pressure on food security, lower food prices and fewer people at risk
of hunger (medium evidence, high agreement). {5.4.2, Figure 5.3}
The impacts of carbon dioxide removal options on SDGs depend on the type of options and the scale of deployment (high
confidence). If poorly implemented, carbon dioxide removal (CDR) options such as bioenergy, BECCS and AFOLU would lead
to trade- offs. Appropriate design and implementation requires considering local people’s needs, biodiversity and other
sustainable development dimensions (very high confidence). {5.4.1.3, Cross-Chapter Box 7 in Chapter 3}