This chapter builds on findings of AR5 and assesses new scientific evidence of changes in the climate system and the
 associated impacts on natural and human systems, with a specific focus on the magnitude and pattern of risks linked for
 global warming of 1.5°C above temperatures in the pre-industrial period. Chapter 3 explores observed impacts and
 projected risks to a range of natural and human systems, with a focus on how risk levels change from 1.5°C to 2°C of
 global warming. The chapter also revisits major categories of risk (Reasons for Concern, RFC) based on the assessment
 of new knowledge that has become available since AR5.
 1.5°C and 2°C Warmer Worlds
The global climate has changed relative to the pre-industrial period, and there are multiple lines of evidence that
these changes have had impacts on organisms and ecosystems, as well as on human systems and well-being (high
confidence). The increase in global mean surface temperature (GMST), which reached 0.87°C in 2006–2015 relative to
1850–1900, has increased the frequency and magnitude of impacts (high confidence), strengthening evidence of how an
increase in GMST of 1.5°C or more could impact natural and human systems (1.5°C versus 2°C). {3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6,
Cross-Chapter Boxes 6, 7 and 8 in this chapter}
Human-induced global warming has already caused multiple observed changes in the climate system (high confidence).
Changes include increases in both land and ocean temperatures, as well as more frequent heatwaves in most land regions
(high confidence). There is also (high confidence) global warming has resulted in an increase in the frequency and
duration of marine heatwaves. Further, there is substantial evidence that human-induced global warming has led to an
increase in the frequency, intensity and/or amount of heavy precipitation events at the global scale (medium
confidence), as well as an increased risk of drought in the Mediterranean region (medium confidence). {3.3.1, 3.3.2,
3.3.3, 3.3.4, Box 3.4}
Trends in intensity and frequency of some climate and weather extremes have been detected over time spans during which
about 0.5°C of global warming occurred (medium confidence). This assessment is based on several lines of evidence,
including attribution studies for changes in extremes since 1950. {3.2, 3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4}
Several regional changes in climate are assessed to occur with global warming up to 1.5°C as compared to pre-industrial
levels, including warming of extreme temperatures in many regions (high confidence), increases in frequency, intensity
and/or amount of heavy precipitation in several regions (high confidence), and an increase in intensity or frequency of
droughts in some regions (medium confidence). {3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4, Table 3.2}
There is no single ‘1.5°C warmer world’ (high confidence). In addition to the overall increase in GMST, it is important
to consider the size and duration of potential overshoots in temperature. Furthermore, there are questions on how the
stabilization of an increase in GMST of 1.5°C can be achieved, and how policies might be able to influence the
resilience of human and natural systems, and the nature of regional and subregional risks. Overshooting poses large
risks for natural and human systems, especially if the temperature at peak warming is high, because some risks may be
long-lasting and irreversible, such as the loss of some ecosystems (high confidence). The rate of change for several
types of risks may also have relevance, with potentially large risks in the case of a rapid rise to overshooting
temperatures, even if a decrease to 1.5°C can be achieved at the end of the 21st century or later (medium confidence).
If overshoot is to be minimized, the remaining equivalent CO2 budget available for emissions is very small, which
implies that large, immediate and unprecedented global efforts to mitigate greenhouse gases are required (high
confidence). {3.2, 3.6.2, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in this chapter}
Robust1 global differences in temperature means and extremes are expected if global warming reaches 1.5°C versus 2°C
above the pre-industrial levels (high confidence). For oceans, regional surface temperature means and extremes are
projected to be higher at 2°C compared to 1.5°C of global warming (high confidence). Temperature means and extremes are
also projected to be higher at 2°C compared to 1.5°C in most land regions, with increases being 2–3 times greater than
the increase in GMST projected for some regions (high confidence). Robust increases in temperature means and extremes
are also projected at 1.5°C compared to present-day values (high confidence) {3.3.1, 3.3.2}. There are decreases in the
occurrence of cold extremes, but substantial increases in their temperature, in particular in regions with snow or ice
cover (high confidence) {3.3.1}.
Climate models project robust2 differences in regional climate between present-day and global warming up to 1.5°C3, and
between 1.5°C and 2°C4 (high confidence), depending on the variable and region in question (high confidence). Large,
robust and widespread differences are expected for temperature extremes (high confidence). Regarding hot extremes, the
strongest warming is expected to occur at mid-latitudes in the warm season (with increases of up to 3°C for 1.5°C of
global warming, i.e., a factor of two) and at high latitudes in the cold season (with increases of up to 4.5°C at 1.5°C
of global warming, i.e., a factor of three) (high confidence). The strongest warming of hot extremes is projected to
occur in central and eastern North America, central and southern Europe, the Mediterranean region (including southern
Europe, northern Africa and the Near East), western and central Asia, and southern Africa (medium confidence). The
number of exceptionally hot days are expected to increase the most in the tropics, where interannual temperature
variability is lowest; extreme heatwaves are thus projected to emerge earliest in these regions, and they are
expected to already become widespread there at 1.5°C global warming (high confidence). Limiting global warming to
instead of 2 could result in around 420 million fewer people being frequently exposed to extreme heatwaves,
and about 65 million fewer people being exposed to exceptional heatwaves, assuming constant vulnerability (medium
confidence). {3.3.1, 3.3.2, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in this chapter}